Ingredients
1 3- to 5-pound chicken
3 large carrots
5 stalks celery
2 large yellow onions
1 bay leaf
Handful of parsley stems
Fresh parsley, to serve
Optional extras: whole peppercorns, garlic cloves, parsnips, fennel bulb, leeks

Equipment
Paper towels
Chef's knife
Cutting board
Large soup pot
Spoon, for skimming
Tongs
Strainer

Instructions
Combine the chicken and water in a large soup pot: Remove the chicken from its packaging, drain off any liquid, and pat dry with paper towels. Leave the skin on the chicken, but trim away any large pieces of fat from around the neck or cavity of the chicken. Place the whole chicken in a soup pot (see Recipe Note if your chicken doesn't quite fit). Add enough water to cover by about an inch.
Bring to a boil, then reduce to a simmer. Keep your eye on the pot as it comes to a boil, and then reduce the heat to low and partially cover the pot as soon as the water is boiling.
Skim any foam that rises to the surface: For the first half hour or so, you'll see foam and scum collecting on the surface of the liquid. As it clumps together, skim it off with a spoon and discard.
Keep the soup at a steady simmer: Keep the pot partially covered and at a low simmer. You should see slow but steady bubbles and wisps of steam coming from the pot (although don't reduce the temperature so low that the water falls below 165°F or else the chicken won't cook through). Add more water as needed to keep the chicken covered, or if it floats, to allow it to bob in the liquid.
Simmer for at least 1 or up to 3 hours. The chicken is ready as soon as the meat registers 165°F and easily falls off the bone, after about 1 1/2 hours, but you can continue simmering for up to 3 hours for richer flavor — just keep an eye out that the chicken doesn't start to disintegrate or turn the soup cloudy. Add extra water as needed to keep the chicken covered.
Prep the vegetables: While the chicken is simmering, peel the carrots and remove the skins from the onions. Chop everything into a few large chunks.
Add the vegetables to the soup: Roughly one hour before you plan to finish the soup, add all the vegetables, the bay leaf, the parsley stems, and any optional extras to the pot.
When done cooking, transfer the cooked chicken and vegetables to a cutting board: Use tongs to pull the chicken and the vegetables out of the liquid and transfer to a cutting board.
Strain the broth: Pour the cooking liquid — now broth — through a strainer into a large mixing bowl.
Return the broth to the soup pot and bring to a simmer over medium-low heat.
Chop the vegetables into bite-sized pieces: The vegetables will still be quite hot, so handle with care.
Shred or chop the chicken: When the chicken is cool enough to handle, pull the meat off the chicken bones, discarding the skin and bones. Shred or chop the meat into bite-sized pieces. Discard the bay leaf and parsley stems.
Return the chicken and chopped vegetables to the broth, and warm.
Season to taste: Give the broth a taste, and then season with a few teaspoons of salt and a few grinds of fresh pepper. Taste again and add more salt or pepper if needed.
Serve: Ladle the soup into bowls and garnish with fresh parsley. Store leftovers in the fridge for up to 5 days.


Recipe Notes
If your soup pot is too small for a whole chicken, you can either cut the chicken into pieces to make them fit, or buy chicken pieces at the store rather than a whole chicken.
For chicken noodle soup: Cook the noodles separately, add them to each bowl, and ladle the soup over top.
Freezing soup: This soup can be frozen for up to 3 months. Thaw overnight in the fridge or in the microwave, and then warm over low heat on the stovetop or in the microwave before serving.